# Final Project Licensing Considerations

## Caveat

I am not a lawyer. I am providing you the results of my scholarly investigation
into intellectual property. If you need legal advice, get a lawyer.

## Copyright

By default, you own the copyright on whatever you create. This means that you
have the right to decide who gets to make copies of the work: it is literally
_the right to copy_. In the United States, you don't have to do anything special
to have the copyright. If you draw a doodle on a napkin, you own the copyright
on it. You can register your copyrights with the federal government, which can
be useful in the case of copyright dispute. However, remember that the copyright
itself is automatic. 

For the final projects, your team co-owns the copyright to the project. This has
the implication that if one of you wants to do something particular with the
project, such as put it up on GitHub or try to commercialize it, you need the
whole team to agree. If one member of the team does not agree, and in the
absence of any other legally-binding agreement, there's really nothing else to
be done about it. 

There are certain circumstances under which the university claims ownership to
student-created work. An easy example is if the university paid you to make it,
such as is the case for employees of the Digital Corps. This is called
&ldquo;work-for-hire&rdquo; and it's very common: if your job is to write code for an
employer, then they own the copyrightâ€”not you. The more nebulous circumstance is
when the university has put significant resources into the development of your
work. They have changed the articulation and specification of this rule during
my years here, but in general it is meant to include cases where students
benefit significantly and extraordinarily from input of faculty or access to
equipment. It is important to note that for this class, I designed our
interactions so that the university would have no clear claim on the
intellectual property. You defined the problem, you designed the solution. While
it is true that I evaluated the structure and process of your solution and
helped you approach the learning objectives of the course, the projects
themselves are yours.

## Licensing

A license determines what rights a user has with regard to a software system.
This includes, but is not limited to, the rights of the user to investigate the
source code of the software or to decompile or disassemble it. You probably have
seen End User License Agreements (EULA) when you run software for the first
time. Maybe you've even scrolled through them before clicking
&ldquo;Accept&rdquo;. These are licenses, and they are an important part of the
organizational structures around software development companies. EULAs generally
are examples of proprietary licenses. This means that the user has no rights to
inspect the source code of the programs they are running. Proprietary licenses
are not the only kind of licenses.

Licenses do not just apply to end users. As a developer, your use of third-party
libraries is also bound by the terms of its license. Make sure you understand
the licenses of the libraries you add to your applications; they may have
significant implications on your options for licensing your own work.

## Freedom

Before we can get into the non-proprietary options for licensing, it is
important to understand freedom. Richard Stallman [famously defined free
software](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) as software that
preserves the following freedoms:

- The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0).

- The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does your
  computing as you wish (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a precondition
  for this.

- The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others (freedom 2).

- The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others (freedom
  3). By doing this you can give the whole community a chance to benefit from
  your changes. Access to the source code is a precondition for this.

Software that upholds these freedoms is said to be _free software_. Note that
&ldquo;free&rdquo; here means &ldquo;free as in freedom.&rdquo; Critics of
Stallman's choice of words have suggested that we use _libre software_ instead,
to make it clear that this is not about economic cost. This is also called the
distinction between &ldquo;Free as in speech vs. free as in beer.&rdquo;

A common misconception of Stallman's position is that he wants software to be
given away, but that could not be farther from the truth. Stallman advocates
selling software for as much as the market will bear. One of his key
observations is that &ldquo;the market&rdquo; here is different from &ldquo;the
market&rdquo; in, say, sub-saharan Africa. It would be permissible under a free
software license for you to buy software and then to share it with your
disadvantaged brother&mdash;a form of charity that is generally disallowed by
proprietary licenses. 

_Free_ software is distinct from _open source_ software. Free software is about
licensing, but open source is about development methods. Open source software is
developed &ldquo;in the open&rdquo; for everyone to see. Rather than do their
development behind closed doors, open source software developers keep their code
publicly readable. Part of the philosophy of open source is that many eyes make
all bugs shallow. 

Many open source projects are also free, such as the Linux kernel, but not all
open source projects are free, and not all free software is open source.
However, because these often go together, you see the combination of the two
referenced as _FOSS_, meaning _Free and Open Source Software_.

## Common FOSS Licenses

There are a few licenses that I recommend for FOSS-licensed student project
work. The [Expat License (a.k.a. MIT
License)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) is a simple and permissive
license; if you've never read a license before, start here, because it's short
and to the point. The [GNU General Public License
(GPL)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html) is a free software license
that clearly upholds the four software freedoms. This observation is echoed by
[ChooseALicense.com](https://choosealicense.com/), which is a project by GitHub
to help people choose the right license for their work. 

The GPL is the one I recommend to student teams because I think it aligns best
with the mission of the university. The GPL says that your users can study,
share, and modify the software, as long as their changes are also shared back
with the community. This feels like a good choice for projects created at a
public university, where the public is a stakeholder in our collective success.
I like the idea that others can learn from the things you have made, and that
what they learn from it is also shared back in a virtuous positive feedback
loop. 

There are many more free and open source licenses. The Free Software Foundation
provides [a useful list of
them](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.en.html), organizing them by
whether they respect software freedom or not. However, GPL and Expat ("MIT
License") are two you see frequently in use, along with
[http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0](Apache&nbsp;2), which is
essentially similar to Expat. 

Note that in none of these licensing cases do you give up copyright, nor do they
restrict you from entering into other license agreements. For example, just
because you release a version of your project under the GPL does not mean that
you cannot also sell a version of it without GPL clauses to a customer: you own
the copyright and you dictate the terms. Licenses are for the users or
customers, not for the creators.

## Public Domain

Besides proprietary and FOSS licenses, you have the option to release your
copyright to the project and put it in the public domain. This means that anyone
can do literally anything they like with the work. Note that if you choose to go
this route, I recommend that you state your software as following [CC0&nbsp;1.0
Universal (CC0&nbsp;1.0)](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/), which
is essentially an international form of American public domain designation. One
does not normally use [Creative Commons
licenses](https://creativecommons.org/licenses) for software, but CC0&nbsp;1.0 is an
exception.

## Considerations for Future Employment

You have spent a lot of time and energy on your project this semester, and there
are extrinsic benefits to this effort. In particular, you can put it to work to
help you land a job or an internship. I recommend that, at the end of the
semester, you migrate your repository from our private class organization to a
public presence on GitHub. This will allow you to share that link with potential
employers, who can then see the fruits of your labor. That is, rather than just
see that you earned some grade in some course, they can actually see the work
you did. 

Of course, before you make a public location for your project, you should choose
how you want to license it. Choosing your license removes any ambiguity from
those reading your code and from within your team. GitHub provides a convenient
Web-based interface for adding the requisite license files to your repository.
Keep in mind that the libraries you use may place restrictions on how you can
license your own work. For example, if you use a library that is licensed under
the GPL, then by the terms of that license, your work must also be licensed
under the GPL. 

It should go without saying that you need to make sure you have followed all the
licenses of the libraries and assets you have used in your project. I recommend
that you list all of your assets and dependencies in your `README.md` file,
including the licenses under which you used them&mdash;even those that you are
using under public domain, just to cover all your bases. This, in addition to
the project itself, shows potential employers that you are serious about the
business of software development.

## References

For more about software freedom, I recommend [_Free Software, Free Society:
Selected Essays of Richard M.
Stallman_](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/fsfs/rms-essays.pdf). 

For more about the history of intellectual property and copyright and their
impact upon creativity, innovation, and society, I recommend [_Free Culture_ by
Lawrence Lessig](http://free-culture.cc/). This book establishes the case for
the important [Creative Commons movement](https://creativecommons.org).